# Considering n-grams at byte, codepoint and word level - for n = 2 .. large



> Also note other considerations regarding the employ of *n-grams*: see the articles / notes linked at the [[0000. n-grams - index| n-grams Article Index]].



*n-grams* -- a.k.a. *k-mers* in another setting -- are (hash) codes representing `n` of the basic units: characters (C `char`, i.e. *bytes*), codepoints ([Unicode codepoints](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_point) are unsigned integer values ranging from range $0_{hex}$ to ${10FFFF}_{hex}$, i.e. spanning a range of 17 × 65,536 = 1,114,112 values, which fits in 21 bits). When "words" are the basic unit, these are *not* machine words, but rather the words in the written human language that is being processed.

We'll leave the subject of identifying and otherwise processing "words" to another chapter; when we talk about them in here we *assume* these "words" are *strings* of arbitrary length, between 1 and some large N *codepoints* long. In practice, this is equivalent to arbitrary length strings where the *codepoints* have been UTF8 encoded, so we can use C++ `std::string` and friends to process these.

## Now about that N...

First, let's consider $n=2$ vs. $n=3$ and $n ≥ 3$: *bigrams*, *trigrams* and the rest: *n-grams*, *skip-grams*, …

*bigrams* are indicated to work reasonably well when the job is language detection from arbitrary text input: the 2-codepoint set produces a wide enough histogram to make language identification by histogram correlation/convolution a viable option.

In actual practice, collecting *codepoints* from -- usually -- UTF8 encoded text inputs is a bit of a hassle, so the question then is: does it work well enough if we employ *byte*-based *bigrams* instead? Well... *it seems so*. But I didn't look too hard at the Asian languages, which are important and reside further up the Unicode codespace: for Chinese, often a single glyph (codepoint) suffices, but stuff like Vietnamese, which is often written in the (accented) Roman alphabet, may be harder to pin down as 2-bytes implies we'll be mostly looking at a (lobotomized) representation of a single Unicode codepoint.

For search (FTS; Full Text Search), etc. the general consensus is 3-gram, but that's not a hard & fast rule: GitHub employs a special crafted skip-gram to help index their programming languages' codebase for search, while others surely have tried other things to get their search performance and quality up: more specialized *n-grams* potentially create *more unique* identifiers, in a wide range, which helps speed up the inverted index queries, but too large a search space makes the index's key space very large and consequently bothersome in (storage) space and time (performance), so that's where those 3-grams are a bit of a sweet-spot, *key range wise*:

if we assume *bytes* as the base element, which is usual, then a *3-gram* is 24 bits wide *in raw form*. $2^24 = 16777216$ i.e. 16M. multiply that by the document index (32 bit? 64 bit?) which points the record in the inverted index at the *document record* in the other table in that search database, then we take, ideally, 1 document per index/n-gram slot, thus ${16M} \times 24 {bits} = {16M} \times 3 = {48M}$ storage cost for the inverted index and the potential to identify 16M documents!

In practice, nobody does 24-bit index elements, so the nearest feasible power-of-2 integer size is 32 bit, hence a storage cost of the inverted index of about 64MByte. Which is very doable on modern machinery.

That is... if a single *3-gram* were able to uniquely identify a document! Which is bollocks!

So we need some more work done:

- given a document X, produce a stream of *n-grams*, each of which must be associated with this document. And preferably with the position within that document, or, when that's too much to ask, an *indication* of *where exactly* we may find that *n-gram*.
- Then we must realize that any *n-gram* can occur multiple times in the same document (try the *n-gram* for the word "*the*", for example 😜) and encoding that within-document position becomes non-trivial.
 
  > Incidentally, here's where the TF/IDF metric shows up as well: *Term Frequency / In-Document Frequency*: sometimes it *may* suffice to merely store the *n-gram* *frequencies* instead of their locations.

* ultimately, our *inverted index* lookup table will store for us, for each of the *n-grams* produced by each document, in which *set of documents* the given *n-gram* was found. This can grow into a pretty hefty *matrix* if we're not *very* careful!
* afterwards, any user search query is also encoded into *n-grams* and a matching search is executed, where the search result is the union of the sets of documents found for each n-gram in the search query.

### A few things to unpack here: ways of speeding up the FTS query?

Given that we already know the *inverted index* is going to be huge & slow, the question becomes: how can we get good search query results with the fewest number of index table lookups?

Ideas:

* many folks advocate filtering for **stop-words** *before producing n-grams* so the number of *n-gram codes* fed to the search-the-index subprocess is reduced.
  While this sounds like a terribly good idea, the question here is: was that one a *stop-word* **to you**? When you are looking for information on the rock band "The The", where (*duh!*) featured top of the chart on the stop-word filter chart, thanks to your *search engineer*, than good luck getting *anything* as the search set will be bloody empty. Oy mate, how about a query error instead, eh? `invalid query: empty token set` or some such? Awesome!
  
  So using the ubiquitous stop-words lists, present all over the effin' Internet, is not such a brilliant idea after all... But maybe we could...
* *adaptive selection of the n-grams to allow into the query set*: I've not seen this one discussed in the search literature and implementation guides (Elastic, SOLR, you-name-it), while it seems pretty obvious to me to do.
  
  The idea is two-fold: 1️⃣ you *very probably* tracked that TF (Term Frequency) in a separate table already, as that would help speed up your BM25 ranking calculus and possibly some other stuff as well, while having a meager cost: *3-gram* says 16M records total, and *frequency* here is rather a misnomer for *occurrence count*, which itself is a natural number that can be stored in a 32 bit integer, or 64 bits if you feel an upper bound of 4G is cramping your style -- it certainly would, if you name were "Google"! … so 2️⃣ you take that TF and use that number as an indicator about *what your stop-words actually are*: (very) high TF numbers indicate that these n-grams aren't very *selective* anyway -- or they must have occurred a zillion times in a few specific documents! -- so how about we go look for the *less frequent* n-grams first in that document lookup index, eh?
  
  This can be improved upon by not using the TF directly, but maybe the BM25 ranking instead. However, that's still not covering the special case where some *prominent* n-grams may occur in only a subset of documents, say "algorithm" in your Computer Science Collection, which is a subset of your document dataset: here we would want "algorithm" to feature as part of the searched n-gram set anyhow, if only to narrow down the search for "*haemorrhage* " (the other word in your search query) to that one particularly snide critique that's in your CS subset, rather than splattering your extensive medical encyclopedia document set onto the search results, obscuring the one you (the user) were after... so the obvious improvement to 1️⃣ is to keep a separate, somewhat-TF-like, lookup index table around where you track every n-gram's *specificity*: *in how many documents of the total set did this one feature at all? we don't care about how many times it features **within** each document, all we care about is: which documents mention this one?* That gives us a useful *specificity* number and the n-grams which feature in the *fewest*  documents are the obvious top choices for adding to the search query, as the documents sets, which we must union afterwards, will be few and *small*, resulting in the least amount of work to do and thus the fastest response, while still delivering the same quality as the other n-grams clearly didn't *narrow the search down*.
  
  Of course, matters become a bit complicated when you send in an "OR"-type query instead of the usual (implicit) "AND"-type, but there we *still* have a decent to win with this: when we allow for user typos and other "data noise"! See the section about N-Grams of a Different Base, for more.
* …



### A few things to unpack here: ways of speeding up the n-gram → document inverted index search?

We've seen above that the search space is basically a *2D matrix* of *n-gram size* by *document count* proportions. Let's see some numbers here: *3-grams* span 24 bits (in their raw form), while we can safely assume the *document count* for our application is somewhere around a *million*: 3 years ago, at last count then, my library was about 140K PDFs. Add to that a few more file types, notes and other tidbits, and it wouldn't surprise me if we crossed into the 1M+ area there.
If we are to *index* program source code, then the current scratch/research disk, where "repositories of interest" have been gathered, currently runs at 28M documents: that includes a metric ton of *duplicates*, *near-duplicates* and *whole uninteresting support files* such as the git repo database files themselves: I just asked my machines how many files it thought it had on that 4GB disk. 28M and counting.

So storing that index as a bit-matrix of ${4G} \times {30M} = {120P}$ bits is *right out*! And even when we would only concern ourselves with my measly PDF library, we'ld take ${4G} \times {140K} \approx {600T}$ bits for that index alone.

Of course, the first thing to do is *compress* that document lookup per n-gram to a compressed bit set: we expect *almost all* n-grams to have a very sparse document set where they occurred.
But even when we (conservatively) estimate the average there to be a hit rate of 10 documents each -- though it's hard (and rather ill-advised) to estimate a *mean* when you're looking at a (suspected) Poisson distribution of document hit-count per n-gram -- we're still looking at a *compressed* index of ${4G} \times 10 = {40G}$ compressed bits. That's still *insane*.

So there's a few more thoughts that need consideration before this becomes *doable*:

- if we take that *adaptive selection* alternative to mere stop-words mentioned before into account, it **also** tells us that we won't be searching for *un-specific* n-grams anytime soon, as we know those will throw up a lot of results and that noise alone will make the search result rather useless, as we'll bombard the user with a torrent of choices to inspect.
  Now *that* implies that *some* n-grams can be safely *ignored* when it comes to index building: when we don't intend to search for them, why add them to the (inverted) search index at all, hm 🤔?!
  This then takes care of the n-grams with the largest document hit sets, as those will be the least *specific* ones anyway.
  Ergo, we end up with the *slightly reduced* set of *specific* n-grams, all of which have, by definition, a relatively small set of documents to their name. However, given that ${4G} \times 10 = {40G}$ number, even lowering it to, say, ${4G} \times 2 = {8G}$, is not going to do it for us, now is it? But we *do* have a reduction of size there, that's not to be sneezed at!
- Now we *must* ask ourselves: is there not a way to do something about that first dimension's number: ${4G}$ ? If we can cut that down, there's a much bigger *gain factor* than getting our $2$ estimate down to, at best, $1$, isn't it?
  One easy approach would be to forego the *uniqueness* of the n-gram number by *folding* them into a smaller space. Using a *modulo* operator or even a *hash*, there's plenty possibilities there...
  The *consequence*, of course, is a slew of *false positives* entering our search results, so we *must* counter those by postprocessing the discovered document set to check whether a *hit* is actually a *true hit*: only if the re-processed document produces the n-grams we were after, does it merit showing up in the final search results. Fortunately, we'll probably be doing very similar to this *anyway* as we want to show the user a snippet/extract of the document *at the spot(s) where the searched-for words occur*: the inverted index only tells *which documents to check*, so we must process them *anyway* if we wish to show Google Search-style local extracts with match highlights...
  *Folding the n-gram space* is, therefor, a viable option and the inquisitive mind then turns to the question: how to fold so we have the *least number of false positives*?! Can we do this hat trick while producing *no false positives at all*?! (So we can also spit out *fast* query responses that don't do the "*show the snippet/extract*" thing *at all* but instead merely list clickable links to the matching document set instead?)
  The answer there is obvious as it has been done a zillion times before in classic *linear hash tables*: at the record spot for the *folded n-gram index number, a.k.a. hash value*, we do not merely list the set of documents: we provide a set of `(n-gram value, document number)` tuples instead, so the *folded n-gram* lookup quickly produces a set of tuples (which include our feared *false positives*), which we then quickly filter by discarding all tuples that list un-matching n-gram values: the cost is about *double* per entry (tuple), as we now have to store the n-gram value with each tuple, but we can safely reduce our n-gram search space by an order of magnitude or more.
  Still, this leaves us with a few questions: *assuming* we cover the entire n-gram search space, thanks to the many possible n-gram values available in a large library like that, aren't we putting the cart before the horse here by *doubling our storage costs* due to the tuples in the *folded index*? … *Yes, we do.* IFF that assumption was to *hold*!
- The next item on today's list of concerns is whether we should have a ${4G}$ numeric search space for our n-grams *anyhow*: how about reducing this number at the *source* by *folding* the n-gram number calculation into a *hash*, with a smaller numerical range?
  Of course, the *consequences* are that our n-grams would become *less specific* as the same amount of content is now press-ganged into a smaller numeric search space, but before we panic, let's have a look at the n-grams and how they come to be:
  First, there's the question *which kinds of n-grams do we want to plug into our search index*?
  An obvious response would be: we want to find the *human words* we seek, so one *kind* of n-gram would be a numeric representation of our *vocabulary*: as this is a generic, multi-lingual system we're after, we're looking at several dictionaries' worth of words. Given my English, Dutch, German, Chinese and a smattering other languages' library contents, I'll take the recently mentioned advisable dictionary size for LLMs (216K) times, say, 5..10 languages: that runs up to 2M words to deal with. The "*un-specific*" words, a.k.a. stop-words, only ever are a very small (yet very frequently occurring) subset of that, so they can be wholly ignored for this numbers estimating game. 2M words it is. *But we are not there yet!...*
  Given our additional heart-felt need to be able to deal with typos, (minor) spelling mistakes and other "noise" factors, such as *inflections* (which is why *stemming* is oft mentioned in the search literature), we will probably need to provide a (partially overlapping) additional set of words to search for: the *stemmed*-or-otherwise-cleaned-up *core words* to help us match documents we wouldn't be able to dig up otherwise: while such *n-grams* might be rated at a *lower priority* to aid search ranking of the final output, they are *most relevant still* and at a roughly estimated 10K *core word stems* per language, that adds another 100K to the search space. **Please do not let these collide with the real words in n-gram search space**: *stems* are not the real thing, but merely an *approximation* of what we're after so it is *very helpful* if we can identify those at any time later in the search process. Anyhow, even if the estimate is off by a factor, we're looking at the equivalent cost of *yet another language* to add to the search space.
  Next on our list is why 3-grams are harped on everywhere and such a hype: when we look at the little buggers not at the word level but at the glyph/syllable level, we can see where our tolerance for typos, spelling mistakes on either end and other "data noises" comes from: take your text input, *normalize it however much you want* and then create a steady stream of 3-grams from that: at 3 bytes or 3 codepoints' worth, we're looking at a rather nice representation of your potential *syllable*: iff we're looking at a misspelled word match, the match will *still be exact* for one or more syllables, if the word is a bit wider -- and most *specific* words are the longer words, the less frequent, words in our languages!
  > We MAY also encode phonetically reduced 3-grams into our stream to counter vowel and other pronunciation mistakes: various "*text distance metrics*" exist; *metaphonics* is one that immediately springs to mind here. Use any of those to "reduce" the text stream to its utter *core* and have 3-grams created from that feed, both at index and search time: any match is a *probable* match for the content we seek. Of course, the n-gram in the *tuple* isn't going to us reject *false positives* here, so we can 1️⃣ do without storing these n-grams in the `(n-gram value, document number)` index tuples as those are surplus to requirement, and 2️⃣ we'll need to re-process that "*matched*" document anyhow now if we want to improve on the (minor?) accuracy loss due to *reductionist preprocesses* applied to our text content here!
  > 
  Still, the hunt is on for smaller, more effective search indexes! Do we have further n-gram *types* considered for inclusion? And how large a search space do we take these glyph-level 3-grams, plus their *preprocessed brethren*, occupy?
Okay, the number of glyph/codepoint/byte-level 3-gram numbers is rather huge: taking one of the smallest alphabets on the planet -- the English one -- that clocks in at 26 basic glyphs, we're looking at $26 \times 26 \times 26 \approx 17.6K$ n-gram numbers. But wait! Our "*alphabet*" isn't *that*! It's what we feed this n-gram encoding bugger! Capitals, next to lowercase, makes it $2 \times 26 = 52$, while we surely will be interested to identify StartOfWord and EndOfWord "syllables" as well: `the` as in the *word* `the`, the *start* of the word `theology`  and the end of the word `lathe` surely will come at rather different *importance*, so our "*alphabet*", in parser technology terms, adds at least one extra: WordEdge/BoundaryMarker, making it 53. Add to that the usual suspects in punctuation, that can aid Named Entity discovery: `m'Donald` vs. `mcDonald` should both identify as words; `let's` vs. `lets` and `Lets` (*from Letland*) is also obvious in its obvious need to be different. Plus we need to pay our dues, our our beancounters will terminate us with extreme prejudice: values and numbers add a need for the ten digits, the `.` dot and the `comma`, it not the (less common) *thousands separators* `'` and ` ` (space), running up the total to USD, EUR, 10, comma and a handful of others: $53 + 10 + 8 \approx 71$ glyphs (assuming about 5 major currencies and not even accounting for the *cents* and *pennies* there, mind you!). Accept programming language inputs and (foregoing APL entirely) you end up with extra braces, brackets, math operators, etc. so you're already looking at the entire *printable range of the ASCII set*, realistically speaking (oh, `@` is for email! … Anyway, I'll grab my coat on the way out!) which turns our little 3-gram combinatorics exercise into a $(127-32)^3 \approx 857K$ numeric range, which is *very noticable*, I'd say, compared to our supposed 10 languages' worth of ${217K} \times 10 \approx {2.1M}$  range space for *human language words*.
> 💩😱🙈Observant readers may already have realized: we talked about *human words & dictionaries* while at the same times apparently considering parsing financial reports and other partly-numerical/monetary documents: won't all those numbers, *acronyms* and other non-literary *cruft* severely pollute our *words space* as all that goodness *should* be encoded as *words*, wouldn't it, if we were to *preprocess these into glyph-level 3-grams as well*, 🤔 *me thinks*, eh?
> And wouldn't that shoot a big fat load of deer-killing lead shot into your *dictionary*-based vocabulary estimates from earlier, hm? Or did you *forget to mention* that you filter/drop all that stuff from the *words set* before turning those *words* into *n-gram codes*?! How about when was looking for an event mentioned in the year 2000AD, or, heaven forbid, some *historic* date like *Hastings* (1066, IIRC), or *Crecy* and *Agincourt* (1415, but you SHOULD read the graphic novel by Ellis for *that one*!) or, in case you *forgot*: *Kristallnacht* (1938)? So how about *years*, or *dates*? Where does this *stop*? All numbers less than 100K, say? And then there's the whole commercial plethora of SKUs. And electronics chips? (`555` anyone? Or `146818`?) With and without prefixes and/or suffixes: `7416` vs. `74HC16` vs. `MC7416` vs. …? So I guess that's another set to filter against a dictionary to discover *viability*/*reasonableness of inclusion into the index* and another 1M "*words*" added to the set, right there.
Of course, this exercise may seem *obtuse*, but it clearly shows that our *full range* of 4G for 24-bit 3-grams is not yet in sight: if we add the large ones, we arrive at ${2.1M} + {1M} + {857K} \approx {4M}$ -- but surely that's **not** the entire story: Asian languages and Arabian, among others, have their own *alphabets* encoded in Unicode space, so how about we take those into consideration?
When we consider *codepoints* as our base unit, we arrive at a total alphabet that's more that half the total Unicode space (we wish to ditch the Symbol glyphs if we may), which gives us an "*alphabet*" estimate of 500K (sic!), which makes our 3-gram space ${500K}^3 \approx {125P}$ which *far exceeds* our {4G} 3-gram range space! So, talking codepoints, we're looking at the occupancy of the entire 24 bit range by that type of n-gram alone!
When we take this down to *byte* level and [UTF8 coding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8), we get an *alphabet* of $256 - 32 - 11 + 1 =  214$ (+1: remember that WordBoundary Marker we discussed earlier!) and consequently a 3-gram range of $214^3 \approx 9.8M$ which sounds far more reasonable to me, given that the ranges for *words* take only about 2M! 🤔 *Maybe* we should *artificially reduce* the 3-gram range for non-ASCII? Or, possibly a less bias/error-prone approach: *fold any codepoint/glyph/byte-based n-gram into its own 1M..2M numeric space range?* → as we already hinted by mentioning *types of n-grams* repeatedly up to now, I guess we should do well to cut up and *fold* that `uint32_t` bit space for n-grams in multiple ranges, one for each *type*, and then add an indicator of the *type* itself in a few *upper bits*?
24 bits is about 16M range, 2M takes 21 bits, we already identified several *types*:
1. plain word
2. stemmed word
3. metaphone/otherwise reduced word
4. n-gram *syllable* (word *part*): *plain*/ASCII/byte
5. n-gram *syllable* (word *part*): metaphone/otherwise reduced
6. n-gram *syllable* (word *part*): numeric/monetary/non-literary content?
and let's add a few more:
7. n-gram for *idiom*/*phrases*, i.e. *word sequences*, e.g. "*in da house*" is a 3-gram here.
8. n-grams for Asian/Chinese words: single glyph, e.g. 血 (blood)
9. n-grams for Asian/Chinese words: dual glyph, e.g. 食物 (food), but (5) `کھانا` in Urdu.
10. n-grams for Asian/Chinese words: triple glyph, e.g. 一頓飯 (meal)
11. skip-grams for anything
12. …
which implies we'll be needing 4 bits for the *type identifier* there.
Now we were concerned about *reducing* the size of our inverted search index, so those 4 type bits (or maybe 3, if we *fold* a couple of those types together into 1) have to come out of our bit count allowance: if we start at a *budget* of 24 bits, based on the reasonable expected index sizes and harking back to the byte-based 3-gram from literature, we're looking at 20-21 bits per n-gram type here.
> Having written this, it still is a Good Thing™️ to split the allowable range into typed subsets like that: I expect that kind of type information to be important to us elsewhere in the search process, as it can be incorporate in the ranking/reporting postprocessing approach: as described, some of these n-gram sub-ranges will produce results which require additional postprocessing, i.e. *filtering*, before producing truly viable search results: **recall the metaphone/reduxed based n-grams: any *hit* on one of those requires a *dedicated* postprocess of document content reprocessing where we apply a "text distance metric" to the actual search phrase itself versus the actual document content itself, before we can call this anything like *reasonably good search/match effort*!**

Great! We have considered n-gram output space in much detail and seen several opportunities there to keep storage costs manageable while providing a decent search performance and quality alongside.

We haven't addressed the document/tuple sets which result from those *raw queries* though! At one point we *do* mention that storing the n-gram with the document id in a tuple is moot for *some types* of n-gram, as it does not help reduce/remove *false positives* for that particular scenario, but I think we can do better there than merely always coughing up tuple sets!

We already know that n-grams have a *specificity*, which is helpful in selecting the ones we'll apply to the index lookup process, but we also know these n-grams can match/hit a *varying set of documents*: some will match only a few, while others will match several, or even *relatively many*, before they finally arrive in that illusive zone where the n-gram is deemed *non-specific*, thanks to its number of occurrences across the document set.
**Hold it!**
How about this?... suppose we're indexing a first batch of documents, all about CS and all mentioning `algorithm`. Taking the above, that would make `algorithm` a stop-word of sorts and we stated very clearly: those won't make it into the search query and thus indexing their document hit set is moot. Okay so far. But now we import a Medical Encyclopedia set of documents *next*: none of those mention any `algorithm` what-so-ever and `algorithm` turn out, *after the fact*, to be quite *specific* as a *category identifying word*. But we never stored the CS document set as it's associated document 'category'! *Oops!?*
How to solve this?
We can store a *specificity index* per (import) cluster, or some such, but invariably we land at the question: how to combine/merge these instant sets? For otherwise we end up with a huge and forever growing number of indexes to scan and that's hurting performance in horrible ways!
And how about words deemed *non-specific* due to their initial high scores, but they do *not* necessarily have to have matched *every* document in the document collective at the time: only occurring in a very large majority seems sufficient, right? After all, we support and *expect* multiple languages, even mixed-languages documents, so it is insanity to demand a potential stop-word equivalent must occur in *all documents*! So... when are we actually allowed to *discard* an n-gram as *non-specific*, really? Were those stop-words from literature any smarter?

To answer: in my opinion, No, they ware/are not and many people advocate *against* using stop words as killer filters (you can downplay their importance in final ranking, but do not discard them out of hand; recall the "`The The`" rock band!) And then about our own discard-as-non-specific rule: it's not easy and clear-cut as all that, either, apparently... 😱

🤔 Maybe a workable answer is to use a bitmap/bloomfilter-style document map for those n-grams which hit a many documents: using bloomfilter-style approaches exchanges storage size for accuracy, which is Good Enough for me: if we can keep cost for the few "loud ones" to a manageable maximum, they won't burden the index storage cost overmuch; meanwhile such a bloomfilter approach will consequently give us a search index output including *false positives* as a union of our (growing!) document set and such a bloomfilter instance will surely produce growing numbers of *suspect* hits. We *could* consider *updating* such a bloomfilter as the number of indexed documents grows and, hence, the relative cost of the bloomfilter instances allows for the use of *larger* bloomfilters, but rewriting filters like that is a tough exercise and any *false positives* you would have *before* will surely remain *afterwards*: exponential hash tables (*dynamic hash tables*) from the nineties come to mind as I was fond of playing with those back then: you start with a hash function, cut down its number of output bits to size "*reasonable now*" and have yourself a very fine hash table. Then data keeps getting inserted and at some point you decide it's time to *grow*: you 1️⃣ mark the old size, 2️⃣ drop 1 bit less off the top of the hash function output and allocate space for the doubled storage space. Next, you can continue inserting as usual, no pain. Search however gets a little convoluted: you check the designated spot and if no match, you also check the slot where the hash index value has 1 bit *lopped off* (as is was in the olden days of this hash table): that's your second spot to match against your search entry. Now you can go all the way down on the lopping-off business at search, traveling back in time for your dynamic hash table, and that's all fine and dandy, but O(log(N)) while hash tables were *supposed* to be O(1) or you rather could have gotten yourself a nice *tree* for your efforts instead, so the usual approach is this: when you *grow* your table like that, you also traverse the second-last historic range of the table for occupied slots and *rehash-re-insert* them into the table as it currently is: this gives you *amortized O(2)* hence *amortized O(1)* cost in algorithm O-expression parlance, as the number of re-inserted items is obviously small, *relatively speaking*. Of course, the bugger is *not* O(1) as that re-insert action comes at a cost anyway, so you're still looking at somewhere approaching O(log(n)), but the worse part of the story is: these buggers exhibit *peaks of sudden activity ≡ huge cost all of a sudden*. I don't exactly recall how this was going, but I seem to recall the trick answer was to refrain from plain old dumb *doubling* like that and instead *exponentially grow* your table size, thus smearing that second-last generation re-insertion cost (now log(log(N)) for today's N!) across the *amortized algorithm pond* and *like that* you're looking at an iron-clad O(1) algorithm, on paper at least! Practice delivered the same result 🙇 and a nice boon to the *exponential growth* is the kick-in-the-butt-at-resize is now all that much smaller so your *peak performance drops* also show much less pronounced on your load graphs, which is soooo awwwsome! I *adored* those dynamic hash tables then, had forgotten all about them when I finally got deep into B+ trees and that incrowd, for those tended to do ever so slightly if inexplicably better on my measly hardware: the re-indexing of course was hash-based so *happening all over the goddamn place* and that's what kills the orgasmic euphoria when you hit storage space boundaries in cache or, more noticeably: 😱DRAM - now you're suddenly looking at disk I/O and (*duh!*) head seek times galore, which were way over a millisecond apiece for I didn't have the very latest and deadliest in server hardware to hand, so a *seek* ended up being a WTF Epoch Event that can kill a dinosaur, let alone a *lovely*💖 crafted class of algorithms!
Now that my memory resurfaces as I write this, I wonder, once again, if the Koreans and other folks I vaguely recall from the exponential hash table papers, they were so smart I felt some exquisite envy, for this is what a *sublime* Ponzi Scheme should be made of! Hell, I hope they live well! 🙇🙇🙇🙇🙇 … I hope you *get* why *re-generating/resizing bloomfilters* like I suggested above feels *exactly the same*: a *great Ponzi Scheme*  in Algorithm Space: you have to regurgitate your own crap and do it very smartly or your (🎉*AMORTIZED*! 🎉 Yay! 🎉) cost will shit a brick! Yup. I haven't done the calculus on a napkin for this one, but I bet you a pretty meme coin this idea is *super efficient* once I pick up that *exponential growth* concept of those dynamic hash tables of lore, as the amount of activity on resize is *soooo similar* 😋🥰 to the stuff I messed with 20-odd years ago! *Oh, my achin' heart, it bleeds for thee!*

Expressions of Amorous Feelings towards lesser-known *beautiful* algorithms aside (always rooting for the oppressed, me!😇), the idea of exchanging growing storage cost and ditto size for *inaccuracy through statistics* is a nice one: after all, the argument here could be that n-grams which merit a bloomfilter/bitfield, rather than your average Joe D. Rockefeller set-of-document-ids-which-match, have so many documents matching them that their *prominence* in search queries should be low anyhow, for these would, without fault, turn up a metric ton of matches, apart from the (few?) *false positives* introduced by the switch to using a statistic rather than a precise & explicit match set: when we are reduced to using n-grams like these in our actual search criteria, we are doomed and headed for the Database Apocalypse any way as the output set will be *considerable*.
Small, tiny, optimistic thought to follow the dread of the paragraph above: Oy, may be we can get away *without* matching the document content n-gram stream or whatever against our search expression here as we're feeding this to a human to ingest: how about we feed *them* the false positives alongside and call it a day? Chalking on up on *performance: delivered! Quality: who gives a (bleep)💩?! It's **Quantity** you've got, baby! In spades!* 🥳 (Imagine the High Fives the BOFH team would give, totally self-congratulatory! *A Job Well Done*™️)

Once we have "*bloomfilter*" as a viable and space cost limiting answer to the inverted index record data content, we can, of course, consider doing a *mixed set* as our documents collective grows: with such growth come new challenges and new, rationally adjusted size cost limits, so we borrow the basic approach from Lucene and friends: create your index in batches. Keep an index intact, while you set up and grow a second one alongside. Then, when you have enough of the buggers to hit the collective high water mark, you go an *join* a.k.a. *merge* the fellas into a new index to be pooped out pronto. To keep such *merges* cheap we don't go and rewrite those bloomfilters, but instead *tolerate* their continued existence: we know which document id range they addressed, as that's the document id range their managing inverted index addressed, so we can store these in a 'set' of sorts iff we mention their applicable document id range -- which happens to be a single continuous range as document id tends to increase forever, during the entire lifetime of the application. Thus we potentially end up with a mixed set of one or more "ranged" bloomfilters (for those batches where this particular n-gram happened to be quite prominent), mixed with *tuple sets* for the other batches, now merged, where the same n-gram occurred far less frequently.

And if all else fails, we can still do the re-generating thing when the user/admin orders a `VACUUM` job on our database! Heck, we could get really pedantic and regenerate from source as we have to keep the document content for other search/analysis purposes anyway, so a "re-generate n-gram stream from source" action is not impossible. It's just *very costly*, so perfectly suited for that rarest of animals: a database re-index/vacuum job!🥳






