# Why it may be advisable to re-index your library frequently while still relatively small


As we realize from a lot of n-gram / FTS literature (and our own notes & ideas) the challenge to produce a search index that's both useful, performant and sensible (in terms of storage *size*) is quite complicated. Rolling your magic q-ball and coming up with the "*use n-grams*" answer is NOT going to cut it!

Any which way we look, the "reasonableness" is floating around somewhere in the vicinity of "3-grams", irrespective of you feed those *grams* of yours: words, codepoints, syllables, graphemes, *bytes* or *what!ever!*…

Then there's the stuff about types/attributed/categorized n-grams, which only is *potentially useful aid* re *search quality*, not storage costs.

Add *ranked*/*weighted* n-grams as yet another means to help improve search quality and search *query performance* (as you go looking for matches for those highest ranked buggers *first*), and that's one more cost factor raised!

Meanwhile everybody and their granny concur: bigrams are *cute* but highly *non-specific* and thus only useful in very much rather  *bespoke applications*, I dare say. 'Course, there's those 3-grams which are somewhat alike as they encode a "word boundary" *identifier* as part of that "*tri*" in *3-gram*. Hurdy-hurdy-effin'-ho, what great fun! 🥳🤢

… So here we are -- **again**, I might say -- at the $n ≥ 4$ Stand of the N-Gram Symposium.
And with us is our local hero: GitHub's *skip-gram*!  Because you might otherwise wonder whether you should dump *all them buggers* in your search index: *you don't*. **Storage Cost**, remember?! 

So *skip-gram* tells us, basically, to be *quite judicial* in picking which n-grams are going to make the grade into our index tables. *duh!* And apart for some pending, serious, questions about what these *should be* there's not a lot one can get from him: the skip-gram paper is nice, but particularly loud in its *ambiguity*: if I need to write patentable blather that's not telling anything supremely useful to the competition, I'll have that one as my Support Animal!
Second bit the *skip-gram* addresses is the need to deal with *search wildcards* in search texts. While that's particularly appropriate for *coder searches*, as programmers are very much used to using these things left & right while the rest of the populace is still getting there, that is an *important consideration* as far as I am concerned -- probably because I'm a programmer too and consider regexes, wildcard searches, etc. as just another "trivial" *advanced query method*. Anyway: our own designs should reckon with these wildcarded search scenarios!
Which brings us to the skip-gram / n-gram internals, where we *weigh*/*rank* **bigrams** in some smartly designed fashion, before they are fed to the *skip-grammer* (nounifying the verb of the 'skip-gram' noun right there, y'all) to help produce *judiciously picked* skip-grams ≡ *n-grams*, which MUST be folded hashes as $n ≥ 3$  and that sort of thing doesn't fit the "*reasonable storage cost*" criterium for *any* base unit, be it *bytes* or larger scopes.

The problem I'm having with all this is in the *precise* secret sauce to creating these skip-grams: their bigram ranking isn't exactly in-word position based as I wrote earlier, but must be something "smarter" to make it really useful. 
OK, maybe I'm overthinking this stuff and IS this done that simple, but then I'm not on my way to replicate GitHub Search, but rather an FTS approach that suits (local) libraries, which contain both regular human texts, academic publishing and "hard tech" such as application notes and datasheets: that's *way different from regular academic or literary texts* as there's plenty specialized tables and numbers/values to identify and decode in there!

So we have to revisit the bigram base approach from our own perspective and understanding and perhaps attempt to rebuild the *skip-gram* concept from there? If we arrive at something that sounds very much like *skip-grams*, than that's great, but I don't care, not really.
What I want is the same though: the fewer n-grams I have to insert into my index tables, the *quicker* and *leaner* my index table will be for the same *perceived search result quality*.

As you can read elsewhere ([[Considering n-grams at byte, codepoint and word level - for n=2..large]]) I already ran into that stopwords are not really such a *hot idea* at all. Even *auto-detecting* / *adaptive filtering* of these, using the gathered TF (Term Frequency) or "specificity" of each n-gram, is not a *hot idea* neither: a little bit later it describes a scenario where previously determined-to-be-stopwords suddenly turn up to be *quite relevant category identifiers* once we import the next batch of documents to index... (the example was: import a batch of "*algorithm*" CS papers first; "*algorithm*" is all over the place and, consequently, a *useless stopword for any search*; next thing you do is import a bunch of medical papers and, *poof!*, suddenly "*algorithm*" turns out to be bloody relevant for any search querying as it clearly identifies your CS stuff. But it's already made its way onto the stopwords list, so you're dead in the water there. *Oops! Uh-oh!*)
So we mumbled a bit about bloomfilters[^bloom] and other "statistical" cop-outs to keep these stopwords-but-not-really-stopwords in the game, more or less. That felt wholly unsatisfactory, you bet!


[^1]:  when I say "*bloomfilters*", of course that includes the entire *family* of likewise algorithms, which are presented as improvements on this riff in some way, e.g. *xor filters*, …


Then there was the section about doing the skipgrams for wildcarded search queries -- after all we need to match skip-gram to skip-gram, *equality of numbers and all that machine jazz* -- and I came away with the sense that, even this long after I wrote that skip-gram piece [[Using n-grams - folding N-grams and attributes into trigrams (for N ≧ 4)]] , I *still don't grok it, do I?*
What's my worry?
First and foremost, I *think* the wildcard-suitable approach there is *flawed*, or rather: *broken*/*bad*. Why exactly? Can't say right now, brain's not operating the way I want, but it keeps nagging and the lesson of decades living with myself is this: when something keeps nagging inside my skull, it turns out to be rotten to the core and a major cause for failure/trouble down-range. No exceptions.

… Back to the drawing board is the best I can do right now.

Say, we *ditch* this whole GitHubby blurb about their *skip-grams*, in particular their blogged example where I went *WTF?* the instant I first read it (and never reverted on that position, if I'm honest with myself), so let's assume -- this was done before; been there, got the T-shirt -- this bit of intel is total and utter *crud* to confuse the masses and send the competitors on a wild goose chase; after all, GitHub is NOT here to save nor aid mankind. You can stick altruism up your jumper, pal 'o mine.

Hence, say, *skip-grams* is the *fundamental idea* and you are left to your own resources to *really find out what a good & proper **skip** is to be, in that jargon word "skip-gram"*. 
Okidoki. I can work with that premise. Let's do this.

First off, we're going to pone this: 2-grams (*bigrams*) are a good basis to take off from. They're right there between "too little information" of 1-gram *bytes* and 3-gram semi-syllables. Heck, let's *tweak* this and simply state that *any n-grammy NUMBER* we come up with as a basis is a proper start. Take a gander at [[trigrams etc - considering the relevant atomic search unit]] and [[Considering n-grams at byte, codepoint and word level - for n=2..large]] for more on that level of abstraction.

Yes, we know that Chinese has a huge alphabet, so we *assume* our base NUMBER is something rather specific enough to at least aid in language detection, one way (*byte-based 2-grams*) or another (*a single Chinese Unicode codepoint/glyph*). As we mentioned *typed* n-grams like that in [[Considering n-grams at byte, codepoint and word level - for n=2..large]], let's keep that *type/category* idea in mind and simply state: we are only going to combine multiple base units like that **when they are of the same type**.

I don't know where we'll land with this -- and I do worry about the wildcarded search thingy here! -- but let's just follow this path, shall we?

So, given that these are our not-specific-enough *bigram*-level units, we CAN do a few things:

1. we can "rank" the buggers, i.e. track their TF / "*specificity*" as we wanted to do for that adaptive stopwords approach already. The key idea to using *skip-grams* anyway is to ditch/hide/gobble-up the base units to that *skip-gram* which are so much less *informative*, i.e. some much less *specific*, eh! Thus a *skip-gram* is a collection of base units (a sequence of these buggers) until the *cumulative specificity* of this bunch surpasses some low-water mark we've set ourselves.
2. when, say, our base unit is already a *word*, but not very *specific*, i.e. a *stopword*, then we can still do the same thing: collect/bundle words until the combo is *specific enough*. The rock band "The The", the phrase "to be or not to be", etc. will be easily caught that way, and *fast*, as it's *phrases*/*language idiom* we're looking at now, when we ask what such *skip-grams* **represent**.

Some the basic rule we intuitively come up with is: bundle the base units until you have something that's *specific* enough; *fold* it into a hash space of acceptable size so storage costs are not getting crazy large, and you're Good To Go™️...

*Not so fast, bozo!* The *skipgrams* will be pretty *specific* that way, but, given there's also that *preprocessed* stream of *stemmed/lowercased/yadayada* content, we're looking at a considerable amount of *skipgrams* (*hash values*) to import into our index tables of various types -- let's keep those categories separated as mentioned/suggested in [[Considering n-grams at byte, codepoint and word level - for n=2..large]], shall we? And we *started* this journey with the goal of *decreasing our storage load/cost*!
So we need to work on our *stop criteria*! We can always gobble/collect base units until we have some *n-gram* that's highly *specific* but then we have to raise the question: **will it be useful?** When we collect words into *idiom* that way, it sounds great on paper, in the pub, but in practice there's only a **potential need** for those in case we're looking for specific phrases that are otherwise chockful of portentous stop words, such as the two examples given above. Hence there's only a need for these when the base unit itself *is not specific enough by itself*; however, this criterium would keep "*the house*" as an *n-gram*, thanks to the low *specificity* of "*the*" so the combo should only pass the acid test when *all components are too low in specificity to matter in search*: given that "*house*" is probably pretty specific, all by itself, we will therefore have to ditch our "*the house*" phrase. ta-ta! *Another one bites the dust...*
OK, let's taste-test that a few more rounds! Take something like "*addressed to the House of Lords*": would we then get a (pretty useless. IMO) *n-gram* of "*to the*"? Nope, as this *sequence*/*phrase*-like thing would have a *low specificity* itself! ⇒ we MUST keep a *specificity ranking* for all our *potential n-gram phrase constructs* as this is definitely not a linear sum thing: "*The The*" is a pretty *rare* sequence and thus *specific* when we talk about that rock band. "*to be or*" and "*or not to be*" are both, intuitively, *specific enough* to pass the bar, while any other sequential extract of that Shakespearean memento is way too obvious/generic, e.g. "to be" can occur in *quite* a few other sentences, e.g. "*your room needs to be cleaned*". We all heard *that one* at some stage in our lives, haven't we? And IU know one thing for *sure*: my mom wasn't the Shakespearean kind. Unless you argue she might have figured as a (main) character in his works, if he'd ever met her!
Still a little finicky, we'll have to investigate this *low-water mark for specificity* thingamajig a bit more before that's conclusive, but I feel a lot better about this one than "working from the inside of the word outwards" as the github skipgram paper/blog seems to suggest to me. That one still reads as if I'm being had, *somehow*.

Okay, so we have an initial concept about how to gather usable *n-grams* of varying $n$.
But that's not exactly *skip*ping the buggers, is it? Sure, neither is it *skipping* per sé what's in the GitHub paper, unless you take the *skipping* sense bit up on the next level: we kind of *ditch* ≡ *skip* any of the *potential 3/n-grams* that could come out of that input stream if we were **not** intent on only keeping the *specific enough* ones only! So I guess I must be *skipping* as well, already.

Still, there's that nagging feeling about the wildcarded search queries...
Let's get this ticked off first: blatant queries for stuff like `*the*` are *way to broad* as they are, only one non-specific 3-gram to match there before we hit the postprocessing stage, so let's agree it's not about serving *all possible wildcarded query statements* like that.
How about `*thermo*` instead, just as a thought experiment? *thermonuclear*, *thermocouple*, *thermostatic flask*, *thermometer*, we're cool with that. Plenty *specific* if you ask me. Now `thermo` also happens to be the start of about every word I can come up with, off the cuff, so `*thermo*` should really be `thermo*` and then this is a *prefix query* where the question then becomes: is my sought-after *prefix* long enough to rate *specific*? Yes, it does. So `thermo` will surely have ended up as an *n-gram* in the index and we're Good To Go! Heck, it might even be that `therm` alone rated *specific enough for us* so we'll be hitting the *n-grams* `therm`, `herm` (*hermine*, *thermos*, ...) and `ermo` all, union the result sets and *presto!*, there's your `thermo`-carrying document set for you! Same process at the indexing side, so that's 3 *n-gram* matches for a single query.

Oh! Please DO NOTE that the example we just did produced a 5-gram, a 4-gram and another 4-gram; all because we deemed their smaller-sized siblings (`ther` (*there*, *theremin*, *Mather*, ...), `her` and `erm`) *not specific enough* -- this is us assuming the histogram numbers from the TF/*specificity* table will tell us so for this example. 

🚧 Also DO NOTE that I conveniently ignored our previous thought about Word Boundary Signaling in *n-grams*, which would possibly *imply* that `*thermo*` explicitly searches for words/documents which DO NOT have `thermo` *start* a word, thanks to the preceding `*`... *or* we should *propagate the word boundary signal marker* through the leading `*` up to the left *edge* of `t` as `*` is meant to match *zero*-or-more characters in wildcard search parlance, hence having `thermo` *start* a word (or in this example, even *end* a word, due to the *trailing* `*`) *should* be an acceptable response to the given search query.   **This notion about having to *propagate word boundary signals across zero-or-... matching wildcards* is a fresh realization!**

So we got off easy with that one, as it was prefix only. How about a center-of-word wildcarded search query? How about, say, `*card*`? That would be right smack in the *center* of `wildcarded` and now we wonder how our *skipgram process* would do...
I've read the GitHub blog article a few times, because it didn't *cinch*, and one of the possible interpretation there that I had was that the GitHub buggers *drop all n-grams for a word, except the outermost*, i.e. the most *specific* one. Yeah, I know. Crazy. But it's possible and I'm not a *native*, so sometimes *the grokking can be a little off*. But, for arguments' sake, let's say they *do*. In that case we can forget about wildcarded word partials as a viable search input, since nothing in the search query would be large enough to span the word; heck, their statement (**paraphrased**) "*we keep going as long as all inner bigrams are of lower rank*" hints, left-side, that they're doing something very similar to what I constructed above, i.e. scan forward until you've got sufficient *specificity* gathered (or hitting the right edge of your word, perhaps?), in which case their example is bonk/misleading, or right-side, they traverse the word from both directions and, **maybe/possibly** , got themselves a ranking system a la my *specificity* bigram table, but now specially engineered to help bump bigrams/n-grams that occur at word edge a tad, so that they a able to cough up the *n-grams* for *specific enough* individual word *parts* for *compound words*, e.g. bumping anything that's got an `_` underscore in there, plus maybe a few extra shenanigans, so you can h0rk up `interest` and `rate` (in an *n-gram* form, *of course*), when munching on a variable name like `interest_rate`. Now *that* would surely be a *boon* for a system with the goal to help you FTS in *software source code*: "Programmer Space" (and a few other buggers) will surely feature on your Worthy Of Special Attention List (WOSA) there! Meanwhile, IFF you agree to agree with the position that wildcarded searches are only meant to help users dig up compound word constructs such as these (and a highly visible thing in software source code, indeed!), given only the *base words*, then I can easily see the match with the *hinted* understanding that them GitHub buggers decided to reduce the *n-gram* count to *maximum: 1 per base word* levels to assist in producing a *lean* and *fast* search index: here the *tuning* bit would be the engineering of the *specificity* table, guided by human decisions about what constitutes a *base word*; a problem quite similar to the one posed to spelling checkers, where input is sometimes *stemmed, though minimally*, to get a good spread of matching results in the associated dictionary. Several techniques can be borrowed from over there, I'm sure.

Back to *skipgram* in **our scenario**: we are not interested in indexing source code, but a rather discordant set of documents in a library/collection, so we have to be a little more lenient and flexible when it comes to wildcarded searches, perhaps: where the GitHub scenario MAY discard `*therm*` as acceptable in a hunt for anything `thermo...`, *I am not so lucky*: if `*therm*` is all I am going to get from the user, I want to be able -- in principle at least -- to help the user *discover* their *thermo*-thingy related subset of documentation!

Maybe this example was a bit *sub-par*, because what I *really* mean to say is: I *would like to match sound-based human memory*. Allow me to explain.
Sometimes we "*remember*" words, entities, things, *phrases*, in a bit *haphazard* way: human recall is not *exact per sé*; sometimes all we've got is a *vague memory* where we seem to be able to produce the *sounds-like-something-like-this* specification, but *not* exactly the part as it was *originally written*. This includes *spelling mistakes* and other *small scale errors*. And my *desire* is to *deal with those as we help you search for what it is you were looking for*. An ambitious goal?! Yeah, I'ld say, rather.
But the fact remains that I would like to reach for this particular bit of sky, any way.

Consequently, given the nature how machine search *works*, I *know* I will have to accept a relatively large index set as my goal, combined with equality-based matching for machines, implies I'll have to accept looking for either smaller *n-grams* too, or at least *multiple variants/incantations of the input stream, turned into n-grams*. Yes, there's a very good reason I'm paying a lot of attention to text distance metrics and encoding reduction schemes (such as the classic *metaphone* approach): those I see as my chances to getting this anywhere near *right*, at least: *viable*.

Why the extra effort? Because this system is meant to serve people. In particular: *me*. And I know my recall is often *imprecise* at the regularly required machine search level, often enough despairingly so. Hence I'm looking for *improvement*; the human gets older and only *deteriorates*, so it's the machine side that will have to *deal*.

So there is that. And then there's my limits to *grokking* some advanced concepts, so it's a slow process, regrettably, but, so far, it's the best I've got. Nothing out there has been matching my needs yet. Qiqqa was *approximating* a few other goals and *hinted* at a Good Enough For Now state of affairs when it was new, but it has failed and the amount of effort required to do this in-system is simply too much, as there's too many subjects that irk, all at the same time. So we try this again, in an environment where I'm more comfortable and have some *feducy* in my learning curve being useful in other areas of my endeavours.
I've spent quite a bit of time with original (Java-based) Lucene and it gets there, but it's kind of *&not there* and *horrible* at the same time, so we do this from the ground up, in a language that I trust (and am learning as I've been way for years): C++
`pisa` et al are the ones of interest,now.

That rant/lament aside, back to the OT: I *think* the concept of *skipgrams*, as it can be applied to my data and needs, is simply pushing up *variable size n-grams* to a level where the *base units* and the *temporary n-grams constructed as part of the process* are all *ranked* re *specificity*:
Let's take that `*card*` query example, with the `wildcarded` word in the index, for a spin.
That bit of verbiage just above then means: we will have to cope with a pretty large *specificity* lookup table because:
1. we already concluded that this is *not a linear process*, i.e. $\text{specificity}({ca}) + \text{specificity}({r}) \neq \text{specificity}({car})$  and $\text{specificity}({car}) + \text{specificity}({d}) \neq \text{specificity}({card})$ for *any* $+$ operator ⇒ we MUST store all *specificity* values for each of those **intermediate** *n-grams* alongside the *specificity* values for the base *bigrams* AND the final *n-grams* themselves.
2. No. 1 above entirely ignores the kind of scenario, so similar to that *stopwords* one, where a "*final*" *n-gram*, after some more document imports, turns out to be less *specific* than anticipated given the document set at the beginning, so **now we need to *re-generate* the entire bloody index + specificity table** (Oh!! Ah!!) OR we prepare for this occasion at least *part ways* by, for example, taking the *specificity index table filling* ONE FURTHER THAN ABSOLUTELY NECASSARY RIGHT NOW: when the *4-gram* is *specific enough* today, we *also* store the *presently superfluous 5-gram score as well*: more work, but probably smart to do when the library is still small and *major changes of opinion in the future* are thus to be expected!
3. Iff my understanding of *skipgrams*, done GitHub style, is correct and they *reduce the set to 1 n-gram per base word*, then I cannot afford such leanness: they MAY throw away `herm` and `ermo` if they decide to take `thermo` as an *n-gram*, but I cannot as I want to *accept* user typos and similar errors, so I'll be storing *several n-grams for the same input chunk*: f.e. `therm`, `herm`, `ermo` (so we can catch typos like `termo` where the user lost the `h`, *plus* `trm` for the text distance metric / metaphone / whatever -reduced input stream, which discards all vowels, thus producing `trm` as a (hopefully!) *specific enough 3-gram* alongside the rest of the bunch.
   So I end up with 4 n-grams to store/index, rather than just 1, in this example at least! Heck, I fear/expect a growth factor of 4 is possibly even a tad on the *conservative side* here, so I'm always on the lookout for smarter reduction filters! 😅

## The need to re-generate the entire search index

And thus we end up at the gate, the closure that is the title of this piece: why it is advisable to consider repeatedly re-generating the search index while your library is small(ish), or rather: you SHOULD regenerate every time you find the *specificity table* starts to show a major shift in opinion: when old *stopwords* slowly turn out to become *category identifying* words with a large set of topic-specific documents to their name; when you find that words, or rather their *specific enough parts that make a final n-gram* start to hit the low-water mark re *specificity* and the index table needs, yet *lacks*, the next larger *n-gram*'s *specificity value*.

Of course it's nonsensical to regenerate every time you hit that upper edge, where the next larger *n-gram* is missing yet *should exist*, so there's some more testing/engineering to do there.
This is why my initial suggestion is to always "do 1 more than necessary", but I *know* this results in explosive cost when the $n$ in *n-gram* is getting larger: if your *4-gram* is not specific enough, you'll have a lot of *5-grams* to store for adherence to the "do one more" suggestion, not because there's already 4 in there, but because a *sub par* 4-gram implies there's quite a few more of them and thus the statistics of an increasing worst case kick in: a bit less to worry about if some 2-grams suggest a need for 3-grams there. 
Sure, this is *particular to the n-gram at hand*, so what's the bother you might ask, and there is *little*, only that having 4-grams in there and then 5-grams and so on, it means the table is *probably* already getting pretty heavy as this sort of thing isn't supposed to happen for a single character in your alphabet only: once one of them has jumped that bridge, soon there's more to follow...
Bottom line: this needs some serious testing; other concepts for deciding to grow the *specificity table* and *how to grow* are invited to attend.

Now, how do we detect that "shift in opinion", eh? Other than watching the needed-yet-missing (n+1)-gram *specificity number* count as a benchmark?
There was that *stopword but not a stopword any more* scenario earlier! Any decent metric to detect those?
We already noted that TF (Term Frequency) is not the one; *specificity* is the *count of documents where the given n-gram occurs* instead; divided by the document count in the library you get your *specificity rank* (nicely 'normalized' to the numeric range 0..1).
So a viable metric for that scenario would need a way to track which n-grams *made the grade before* (for being reckoned a *stopword*) and now are not, any more: as the document count per *n-gram* simply increases over time (*assuming we never destroy documents and remove them from our library, which is an action librarians are indeed loath to do!*) there's no worries there. The question then turns to the storing of the document set for this *n-gram* itself: when do we turn to employing bloomfilters and their ilk, versus (compressed?) integer lists, storing the explicit set of document ids. And when should we *revert* that decision or migrate to a *larger* bloomfilter, as fill rate an false positive count estimate rise to unacceptable levels?

At the moment I have no better answer than to say "ad hoc", i.e. count the number of entries that cross the line of acceptable performance and then trigger a total regeneration when the count reaches the high-water mark. Apply the same bloomfilter size setting to all entries, or at least double all the ones that need it or are already closing in (one table scan to go and check this) so that the next regeneration is a reasonable long time away.
Should we act on the first deterioration? Ideally, yes, but then the grow/doubling should be applied to relatively many blooms that have a high-ish fill rate already so you still maintain a large hysteresis and consequently infrequent full index regeneration actions, which are pretty darn costly each.

When do we *stop* regenerating? I don't know. Another one for the "let's do this and see what happens" *KWW* engineering approach. (KWW = *Kiek'n Wat Wu'd*; ⛳Twente(NL) methodology; a proven technology, already hundreds of years. Never beaten. 😘)








-----

## The trouble with a documents library that grows over time

There's rather few published works discussing dealing with this scenario (apart from some Lucene/SOLR stuff, that is); most research is reporting all sorts of great news re search improvements for a *stable library*, often a test corpus or two that's *whole & ready* from the very beginning.

Here we are, however, facing the challenges of dealing with a library that *will keep changing over time as the user/librarian keeps adding documents to the "corpus" i.e. the library to be indexed/searched.* This implies that tuned search indexes deteriorate gradually unless special measures are implemented to keep them up to date; pre-calculated scores/ranks, etc. become obsolete rather quickly, particularly when the library is still rather small and new (batch) imports cause significant change. The discussion above & elsewhere about stopwords-that-once-were-but-no-longer is just one aspect of this, token scores, document clusters, everything is in flux and requires are regular update/re-do.
These jobs are not yet a heavy performance/cost burden when the library is tiny, but the cost of setting up the search afresh becomes a noticeable effort once the library gets larger, say a couple of 1000 documents, or more. How to cope with this once the library becomes seriously large is still... äh... subject to active research.

AFAICT it's only Lucene which offers some serious documentation on this matter. There's a smattering of others, but nothing like other search subjects, such as dealing with n-grams. (As this is addressed by Lucene, obviously the subject will also surface at SOLR, ElasticSearch et al, all of whom are constructs on top of Apache Lucene.)

There's plenty of work published regarding when you become *really huge* and your search indexes don't fit in single Reasonably Priced Hardware™️ (to paraphrase Top Gun) any more: sharding, etc. is all very nice, but I'm looking at libraries and indexes that are *personal* or *small team* oriented and *strictly local*: the modern equivalent of your classic Library Room in large houses & estates, a century ago. My own collection of over 40K unique documents is a good example of the size and complexity we're facing here for a local definition of *large*: several TBytes of storage is *considerable* and separate disk for a search index *might be considered to be a bit much of an ask at this scale, though not entirely out of the question*; however, the *single machine* bit is definitely a *requirement* here.
Other folks are expected to have smaller or similar sized libraries, but not very much larger than this (140K documents including suspected multiple duplicates; yes, it's a wee bit chaotic ATM, without proper management software available to deal properly with this a personal library at this magnitude...)
Ideally the entire library, even at this large size, should be *portable* on a decently powerful laptop machine. 
This implies there's some metes and bounds to the search index re CPU power and storage /memory limitations & costs that the scenarios applicable to the Big Boys do not consider all that much.

Ah well, to be continued...








