# Introduction

This comprises a set of notes about what I've been working on, researching and thinking about while tangling with the PDF/OCR conundrum. at large.

To keep up a modicum of organization here, each "major" item should get its own page, if it hasn't already.


----

Before we go, here's an important interlude: there's a few Google Scholar / Search phrases that I wish to recall and be reminded about as some were a bit of a surprise; as usual, if you don't use the *magic* word, Google/Bing/Brave/et al won't deliver. Or rather *worse*, really: *they will deliver*, but all they'll deliver is the bland subset you already know. And I'm doing it for helping me stumble across stuff I wouldn't automatically have thought of or run into.

### Google Search key phrases that help

When you are looking into this stuff, here's a few search phrases that would be of use:

- image *binarization* (duh!)
- *conversion to bicolor* image -- yes, some folks apparently can't write "monochrome" 😘 ; makes their papers move *all-l-l the way* to the back in my Google Scholar searches. *sigh*
- text *spotting* / keyword spotting -- because "text extraction from natural images and photographs and such" is a bundle of search phrases that did not pop up those mothers previously. I ran into them by accident.
- adaptive *thresholding* / multi-level thresholding
- document layout analysis / page layout analysis
- image *morphology* -- yes, it took quite a while before that word got a *rememoral*[^1] place in my brain. Took me a bloody year; it started with image *convolution* using *kernels* and then I got pointed at image *morphology* using *kernels* and my brain **blocked** it all for a long time as the kernels I knew are either *Operating System Kernels* or *grain* that's not met the miller yet (I don't know about you, but I eat my kernels *ground* 😱): that's bloody kernels for ya!
  Turns out someone needed a word for a *2D sliding window* a.k.a. *2D weight matrix* a.k.a. *2D image mask/sprite* and that's what we landed with, apparently. Meanwhile me back in my shielded Twentsch/Dutch enclave grew up with other verbiage and it turns out I'm still as stubborn and inflexible at 50+ as I was at 10+ when it comes to some random words that simply *refuse* to drop and *land*: the number of times I had to look up the term as if I was a preschooler are... innumerable. Odd stuff, brain(s).




# TOC

- [[Restoring punctuation that got lost during preprocessing, denoising, or in OCR itself|Restoring punctuation that got lost during preprocessing (denoising, etc.) or in OCR itself]]
- [[tesseract - can we use, retrain, the RGB BLSTM engine for greyscale plus alternative features, e.g. tesseract v3 skeleton data|`tesseract`: Can we use (& retrain) the RGB BLSTM engine for greyscale plus alternative features, e.g. tesseract v3 skeleton data?]]
- [[tesseract - color image to greyscale conversion - OkLab,CIELab colorspace floating point instead of 256-discrete-level uint8_t|`tesseract`: color image to greyscale conversion: OkLab/CIELab colorspace + floating point instead of 256-discrete-level `uint8_t`?]]
- [[tesseract image binarization et al - tuning the preprocess parameters by applying a system feedback loop|Re `tesseract` image binarization et al: *tuning* the preprocess parameters by applying a system feedback loop]]
- x
- 
